Pleasure to meet you, Mr. Creeley.
I've got, as you can see, I've got three books here.
I've got your collected poems from 1975, and I even put a little plastic thing on it, that's how much I value it.
You've collected essays, and interestingly, the selected poems of Charles Olson.
It is an interesting kind of a, you know,
collection of works here, isn't it?
This last of the Charles Olson's, Charles the Selected Poems, is really—that was an incredible responsibility.
Well, let's start with that.
Well, I was thinking, particularly being here in Worcester, that aspect or that fact of his life gets curiously muted.
In some ways, I remember growing up in a small town with Jackson, not that far from here.
And it wasn't even that one thought about it, so to speak, but the sense of that vast and various world out there was the lure, especially, I think, during the Depression years.
But in any case, the sense of wanting to find it and make something of oneself was a classic boyhood imagination.
So I think what happens with Charles, in part, is that when he leaves Worcester, and I now realize when his mother, after his father's death, also leaves,
that the kind of occasion or sense of place to come back to or stay located in must have gone to was going to Wesleyan.
I remember it's mentioned in Edward Cronin's piece in the paper, but in any case the point that when Charles goes off to Wesleyan he's got a suitcase with all the labels on it, and apparently
He did it, I think, some, I was talking to Frank Quinn, who was here for years, fellow poet, and he told me that he in turn talked to someone who'd gone to college with Charles and wondered what all the labels signified, but apparently they were literally labels.
They weren't.
They didn't argue.
No, no, no, but it was his way of trying to front his own shyness or his own vulnerability, really.
That was always the curious double in him.
On the one hand I've never had a friend or known anyone more able to move in the terms of the world.
I mean Charles came into a place like this without any kind of overt glad-handing or charming, no pitch.
But within a day or within an hour, people would be clustered around him as though he were sort of a beast coming around the honey.
Was that the power of the poet?
He was an immensely attractive person.
And that gets curiously, it's hard to represent, because at times he seems belligerent and gets angry.
He's not easy, so to speak.
He seems at times difficult to quote, understand, unquote.
He was immensely attracted to people.
I remember one time in Vancouver, we'd been... I love the way you point north.
Yeah, it was up that way.
We used to... We were given, we could have our lunch in the faculty club that the university had, and it was sort of old-style English decor and feel to it.
It was very kind of, not formal, but it was very solid, real lunch.
And so we used to have these meals there in the breaks of the activity we were otherwise involved with.
And the waiters were principally persons working, you know, students working in college and working their way through school.
So I remember that was the fact that you couldn't go out on this little balcony because the waiters weren't committed to go out to bring you food.
And I remember Charles characteristically said, that's no problem, we'll meet you at the door and take it.
Because it was so pleasant to sit down on this balcony, and there was no rule against doing it, just one couldn't be served there.
So we could try to make that better.
And in any case, this fellow waited on us consistently all the week.
And I remember when we were now to leave, particularly the child, he said, I've just quit my job, it will never be the same.
And, I mean, if you read Charles Bohr's account of him living in Connecticut, called Charles Olson in Connecticut,
I mean, Charles would, he finally ends up living in the upstairs part of a small sort of restaurant inn, and literally they're bringing him his meals up the stairs.
And that was not just sort of indulgence or something he paid for, but he was immensely attractive in that way, and people would really, you know, I remember being at dinner with him once, and this was a very Pukka British Hotel dining room, the Connett Hotel in London.
And we were there, three or four of us would come in late.
Charles, the manager, walks down the hall with us and sits on the seats and all this stuff.
And finally, when it's time to leave, Charles has managed to secure seven of the waiters, all seven waiters, by talking to him about the Tarot Pact, the Italian Tarot Pact.
They're all Italian.
They're on the Genoa deck or the Marse deck or whatever.
In the meantime, there were all these other people waiting to get their bills and get out of there.
But that's the effect he could have.
And I guess partly people were made curious by his physical size.
But I've known other tall men, James Laughlin, the New Direction Publisher.
There are tall men and women who don't have that particular
When you started, you mentioned the responsibility that you felt in doing the collection.
Well, the sad fact, the sad and absolute fact is, of course, that he can't do it himself.
But his work has been published.
Yeah.
Why do you think a selection was in order at this point?
Well, several reasons.
One was that the—I'm giving you milk.
I hope that's all right.
Do you want it?
That's fine.
Or I think you can give me this one.
No, that's fine.
I can drink it either way.
Just no sugar.
I think the—well, several factors seem to me.
One was that literally the cost and physical bulk of the two primary editions, whether the Maximus poems or the collected poems, they were not casually obtained.
The Maximus is big.
It's big.
It's a great book in that fact.
The scale really is part of it.
But the point was that if I was trying to attract someone who may not have read Maximus poems, or trying to think of what's this all about, or the young, frankly, or simply people, I wanted a book that would be less intimidating in its physical character, and also less expensive, and simpler to move with, to locate the person in, is what I'm saying.
Is there a hope?
I know that you pick up the New York Times, and I don't know how infrequently you see poetry reviewed.
The University of California Press is also facing severe financial cutbacks.
I don't think they're going to dump the book, so to speak, but their ability to locate and distribute the book is probably not as terrific as it might have been.
I think it's a book that will, not ambitiously on my part, I think it's a book that will travel.
And I think it begins to read Olson from the point of view of a reader rather than the point of view of either a critic or simply a devoted friend.
analyze him or make judgments of that kind at all.
But I was really doing a very old-fashioned thing.
I was including those poems that moved me particularly and consistently.
I literally sat down with the two major collections of his poetry and turned pages, and that one, I always remember that one, put that in.
I didn't try, I had no program.
Did you work from edited texts?
Yeah, I worked from George Butterick's two volumes.
There was the third that George had also edited, A Nation of Nothing But Poetry.
And I was, yeah, I looked through it.
So you weren't editing, per se?
No, I wasn't doing the scholarly situation of editing.
You were doing a selection.
I was doing a selection.
And I wanted a selection that would be of a scale.
And an economy that would, as I say, travel comfortably and lightly would not be the heavy authority of the otherwise available poems.
There's no one who's going to walk into a bookstore and casually pick up the Maximus poems and pay for it.
Do you see Olsen as a poet who still awaits discovery?
He's almost, in some sort of curious ways, in the same situation that Ezra Pound was toward the end of his life, or particularly during the time that he was in St.
Elizabeth's.
He had intimidatingly devoted, you know, people, people who almost made one fearful of attempting to read Pound because of the
you know, the very terrific profundity and accomplishment of his work.
I mean, really, one wondered if one were good enough to read down, and because of the complications of his political and social life, it was not an inviting prospect.
And also the questions of his stability.
Right, so I would get these notes.
I remember writing to him as a young respecter of his
And I thought, well, you know, I wanted to say that I respect and am devoted, I like your work.
I didn't want to have it convinced, or I didn't want to have some sidekick.
You know, I didn't want to be confronted with my own age group saying, you know, we don't think you're good enough or right enough to read this stuff.
So Charles had unwittingly, sadly but truly dead, he didn't do it, but there began to be increasingly a cadre that were protecting him, as they felt.
They were protecting what they felt was the true meaning.
And many of them were friends, so it was a very complicated situation for me personally.
I didn't want to
I didn't want to denigrate or contest their own love for this terrific poet.
But at the same time, I didn't want to see the whole thing become such a private club that no one would be, you know, you wouldn't want to be part of the gang.
Women particularly, for instance.
Now you'll be reading from his work, is that correct?
Yeah.
I'll be reading from poems, particularly to Worcester, obviously, and a little bit of the prose.
where he talks of his father, especially the whole situation with his work as a mail carrier, a letter to the classic postman, and the way his attempts to support the unionizing mail carriers
backfires and he finds himself really leaned on by the administration.
It's rather extraordinary, don't you think, that Worcester is home?
And I'm not a Worcester president from someplace else, Lowell.
That's a great place.
Another great city, right?
But when you think of Olsen and Kunitz and Bishop.
Yeah.
I was thinking of Bob Cousy.
Bob Cousy.
I was deaf when I was coming out of New York.
He's from New York, isn't he?
Yeah, but he lives here in New York, apparently.
In terms of a Whistler native.
No, he's not a local boy.
I know when Robert Giroux was doing the collective prose of Bishop, I had interviewed him over a couple years ago, and he wrote me.
And he said, the facts of her life, her childhood and wisdom, are a mystery.
And I went, well, I did about two days' worth of research, and I covered it to the point that he thanked me in the book.
That's very useful, yeah.
But he said there has to be something in this.
Don't you think it's an old-time, it secures two kinds of people, either classic people who need a job, working class, in the various factories and mills?
And or the people who own them.
But in terms of poetry, I mean, really, what is it?
It's free.
It's cheap.
But anyway, to get back to what I guess was driving, or briefly in a way, when you read from your own poetry, do you ever feel, I mean, do you ever revise as you go along?
Not usually, but occasionally.
The only dilemma, or the primary dilemma in reading one's own poetry is it gets stale.
So telling a story or a joke or something, there's a time when the repetition of it, simply one knows it too well, it either becomes a study like a theatre piece.
And that doesn't, for my interest, really work as poetry.
I can read with my own interests, clearly enough.
But I'm really not interested in reciting the poem in the standard way.
So if it doesn't stay fresh to me, you know, frankly, getting here by plane, etc., etc., in the car, I mean, if there's not something to do this evening, I'm going to be very damn bored, you know, and go to sleep.
So what I try to do is to think of what is fresh in this material, what stays interesting.
That's what I reap for in all.
So how do you feel reading somebody else's work?
I've read it a lot.
I remember Duncan, Robert Duncan is a very particular friend of both Charles's of mine.
And he made a beautiful statement once, he said, I can't remember if I wrote it or I read it.
That's great.
And you know, that's it.
At times there's work of Charles's that feels so intimate.
Well that's funny because in this collection of essays you mention, you thank somebody
It works in the other way, too.
Well, there are things, for example, Charles's rhythms.
You've got to think of Bob Cousy, because reading that particular way he would pass, or break, or fast break, or whatever, the way he changed basketball.
There are moves in Charles's writing, which are not intellectual, but are just physical moves.
He left him naked, the man said, and nakedness is what one means.
That, he left him naked, the man said, that kind of rhythm, and nakedness is what one means, et cetera, et cetera.
That is such a beautiful, quick shift of rhythm, almost like a drummer's rhythm.
And it gets the thing to be said so quickly and clearly in your head, and it gets to you so quickly.
He left them naked from that side.
I guess that was the most impossible question.
Did everyone ask anything to create a writer?
Where did the stuff come from, of course?
I don't really know.
That's sort of the curious, like the ability to whistle or something, or carry a tune.
It seems to be some innate
I mean, did Shakespeare really think in imagery?
I don't believe it.
I mean, one thing that I really do believe is that people, and again, it's Charles' great quotation for him, was, we do what we know before we know what we do.
That's great.
That seems to make absolute sense.
And I couldn't believe, for example, whether in sports or writing, that people were
We're thinking it all out ahead of hand.
I mean, a lot of them, we practice.
I mean, obviously.
Michael Jordan, I'm sure he's not rationalized.
He's not saying, now I will lift and take the ball and put it in the basket.
Extraordinary aerobatic.
I know.
Obviously he's rehearsed it a lot.
In your own case, in one instance, when does one realize, I have a gift here, or an ability, or a talent, or an insight, and I'm a poet, or a poet is my calling?
Well, I think on the other hand, again reading this quote, he obviously loves it.
No, he's making a very simple point.
Basketball was very good to me.
Not just it paid me a lot of money, but I really liked playing it.
And his point is simply that it gave him not only a use of himself, but it paid him well, et cetera, et cetera, but he was always interested in playing it.
And I think with so-called poetry, with poetry literally, it really stays interesting to me as something I can do.
Again, because Cousy was saying I still like it.
I can't physically make it, perhaps, but I can still play.
If you read the New York Times today, Michael Jordan showed up at the floor practice.
I saw that.
And they were trying to read the tea leaves here.
What does this mean?
Kuzi was saying that's going to be very hard for him to stay out, and talked about the, oh gosh, you know, oh hell, the great Celtics.
Larry Bird.
His first season that was really hard.
Because he had physical problems.
He had really mandated it.
He had to quit.
But there's nothing about quitting at the absolute top of your form, like Jimmy Brown or Ted Williams or .
And we all saw Willie Mays play.
Yeah.
I think it was a kid growing up.
Joe Lewis was the hired.
Yeah.
It's just heartbreaking.
It's very, very sad.
Well, where the sense if you could quit while you're ahead is that, but if you don't do anything else, if you don't have anything else that really interests you.
Do you think that applies to writers at all?
Yeah, I think it does.
I think the curious time is when one gets old or is old.
There can be an affection or respect that one has literally earned in what one's done.
I mean, does a writer lose a couple of inches off his fastball?
Oh yeah, sure.
In the sense that what gives him or her
of emotional prompting or a push, that changes significantly.
Also, the surprise is inherent in this, you know, saying, moving this way or that way in a narrative or a rhythm or whatever.
Again, one isn't, it isn't the same, not exactly, it stays wondrous or wonderful, but it doesn't, it's not the surprise quite as it happens.
I mean, it still works.
That's the pleasure.
It's satisfaction, so to speak.
But also the dilemma is that one becomes, in some old-fashioned way, too capable.
And also one sees the... I was thinking of the election results in New York and whatnot.
I mean, isn't there right or wrong, but you recognize the reaction to the fears of increased costs of living, etc., etc.
It's a very human and old-time reaction, whether, I mean, I regretted it, so to speak.
I wish Florian or whoever, Dinkins, whatever, had stayed.
But here, I can understand, as they say, why people didn't feel that way, especially those who, you know, think, when's it going to stop?
Well, in Jersey, I don't understand.
That's funny, isn't it?
Yeah, it seems so to me.
New York, I can see.
Yeah, that was just so close to the other times.
Yeah, they're both.
They're all pros in that.
Crazy.
But a little bit of your biography.
You mentioned acting.
Well my father had been a, during his life was primarily a doctor.
He grew up in Belmont and his father had been a farmer actually.
And then he must have had him sold the farm at one point.
to all the real estate that was growing up with slides at Belmont Hill.
So that left him in a comfortable space.
He was briefly in the state legislature.
And then anyhow, that's where my father was the only surviving child.
He had a sister who died in adolescence.
But in any case, he then went to Tufts and he went to Harvard Medical School.
and then practiced in the Boston area for all of his life, actually.
When I was born and out of Simms Hospital, where he was the resident physician, head of staff for a while, and then we lived at that time in Watertown, on Aubin Street.
And then he got this idea, which was probably coming in in those days, in the late 20s,
of getting the family out of the edges of the city.
I don't think it was a sense of a grand estate, but he wanted the country, you know.
So he got this old farmhouse out in Acton, West Acton, and that's where we were living when he died.
He died about a year later.
Is Fort Devens out there at that time?
Yeah, yeah.
My mother used to take her modest paycheck up to air, you know, in the bank.
Now my peripheries as a kid were Maynard, for example, I think of Hudson.
My Aunt Elvera came from Marlboro.
My Aunt Bernice lived in Laconia.
Lowell, for example, used to go on the way up to Laconia.
So that was Chelmsford.
Yeah, the old town of Boston, occasionally Waltham, that kind of thing.
So when he died, my mother, who'd been a nurse, and went back to nursing, and she was first a nurse in Stowe, for example, and then when the job in Acton became open, she happily got that, was the nurse in the Acton street all the time I was growing up.
But I'm really a single parent.
I got a job here, and I had it, but then the University of Buffalo, where I worked, came through without my intent, came through with another offer that was just too good to say no to.
The job where you were working?
Here at Worcester Polytechnic.
I thought so.
I was very drawn to it.
You've been there for some time, though, in Buffalo.
Yeah, I've been there for 1966.
I think that's...
That was part of the, when I really was coming here, and we really all had signed the final papers.
This was in 88.
Anyhow, it did in Worcester.
My wife had seen it, you know.
I thought it would be lovely to get closer to home.
It was a very attractive job.
Was it possible for a poet to survive as a poet?
Yeah, I think Bob Bly does very well.
Denise Levertop has primarily done so, Allen Ginsberg.
Both Denise and Allen have taught, but Allen now teaches regularly at Brooklyn College.
And Denise has just retired actually from teaching.
She had been teaching at Stanford.
But in her case she was teaching in a writing program.
Now, is this the gentleman?
Hi, Bob Craley, hi.
Hi, I'm Ken Cliff.
Hi, Ken Gibson.
Hi, how are you doing?
Nice to meet you.
We're doing a little interview.
Are you ready to run right now?
You're my host.
Yes.
You may take your time.
If you don't mind.
Not at all.
What was your schedule?
What time do you want to dinner?
We're supposed to be a restaurant.
Oh, you are.
We better wind down.
I can get you.
Can I quiet you sometime?
Yeah.